EIP-4762: Statelessness gas cost changes (#4762)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-4762.md

The main differences from gas costs in Berlin are:

 * 200 gas charged per 31 byte chunk of code. This has been estimated to increase average gas usage by ~6-12% suggesting 10-20% gas usage increases at a 350 gas per chunk level).
 * Cost for accessing adjacent storage slots (`key1 // 256 == key2 // 256`) decreases from 2100 to 200 for all slots after the first in the group,
 * Cost for accessing storage slots 0…63 decreases from 2100 to 200, including the first storage slot. This is likely to significantly improve performance of many existing contracts, which use those storage slots for single persistent variables.

Gains from the latter two properties have not yet been analyzed, but are likely to significantly offset the losses from the first property. It’s likely that once compilers adapt to these rules, efficiency will increase further.

The precise specification of when access events take place, which makes up most of the complexity of the gas repricing, is necessary to clearly specify when data needs to be saved to the period 1 tree.

> ## Implementation notes

Reviewer: This is not a valid top level EIP section, can you please fold it into an existing section?

This EIP will mean that certain operations, mostly reading and writing several elements in the same suffix tree, become cheaper. If clients retain the same database structure as they have now, this would result in a DOS vector.

So some adaptation of the database is required in order to make this work.
 * In all possible futures, it is important to logically separate the commitment scheme from data storage. In particular, no traversal of the commitment scheme tree should be necessary to find any given state element
 * In order to make accesses to the same stem cheap as required for this EIP, the best way is probably to store each stem in the same location in the database. Basically the 256 leaves of 32 bytes each would be stored in an 8kB BLOB. The overhead of reading/writing this BLOB is small because most of the cost of disk access is seeking and not the amount transfered.

> ## Backward-Compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Backward Compatibility
```

---
eip: 4762
title: Statelessness gas cost changes
description: This EIP introduces changes in the gas schedule to reflect the costs of creating a witness. It requires clients to update their database layout to match this, so as to avoid potential DoS attacks.
author: Guillaume Ballet (@gballet), Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Dankrad Feist (@dankrad)

> discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/4763

Reviewer 2: Please create an Ethereum Magicians forum thread for the discussions-to.  We no longer support using GitHub issues for this purpose.

status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2022-02-03

> requires: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---

> # Statelessness gas cost changes
> 
> ## Summary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Abstract
```

This EIP introduces changes in the gas schedule to reflect the costs of creating a witness. It requires clients to update their database layout to match this, so as to avoid potential DoS attacks.

## Motivation

> The [Verkle tree EIP](https://notes.ethereum.org/5HDhQXstTaKtVqVbS7S9yw) requires fundamental changes and as a preparation, this EIP is targetting the fork coming right before the verkle tree fork, in order to incentivize Dapp developers to adopt the new storage model, and ample time to adjust to it. It also incentivizes client developers to migrate their database format ahead of the verkle fork.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The introduction of Verkle trees into Ethereum requires fundamental changes and as a preparation, this EIP is targeting the fork coming right before the verkle tree fork, in order to incentivize Dapp developers to adopt the new storage model, and ample time to adjust to it. It also incentivizes client developers to migrate their database format ahead of the verkle fork.
```

Note that tree keys can no longer be emptied: only the values `0...2**256-1` can be written to a tree key, and 0 is distinct from None. Once a tree key is changed from `None` to not-`None`, it can never go back to `None`.

### Replacement for access lists

We replace EIP 2930 access lists with an SSZ structure of the form:

```python
class AccessList(Container):
    addresses: List[AccountAccessList, ACCESS_LIST_MAX_ELEMENTS]
    
class AccountAccessList(Container):
    address: Address32
    subtrees: List[AccessSubtree, ACCESS_LIST_MAX_ELEMENTS]
    
class AccessSubtree(Container):
    subtree_key: uint256
    elements: BitVector[256]
```

## Rationale

### Gas reform

Gas costs for reading storage and code are reformed to more closely reflect the gas costs under the new Verkle tree design. `WITNESS_CHUNK_COST` is set to charge 6.25 gas per byte for chunks, and `WITNESS_BRANCH_COST` is set to charge ~13,2 gas per byte for branches on average (assuming 144 byte branch length) and ~2.5 gas per byte in the worst case if an attacker fills the tree with keys deliberately computed to maximize proof length.

The main differences from gas costs in Berlin are:

>  * 200 gas charged per 31 byte chunk of code. This has been estimated to increase average gas usage by ~6-12% (see [this analysis](https://notes.ethereum.org/@ipsilon/code-chunk-cost-analysis) suggesting 10-20% gas usage increases at a 350 gas per chunk level).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * 200 gas charged per 31 byte chunk of code. This has been estimated to increase average gas usage by ~6-12% suggesting 10-20% gas usage increases at a 350 gas per chunk level).
```

---
eip: 4762
title: Statelessness gas cost changes

> description:  Changes the gas schedule to reflect the costs of creating a witness by requiring clients update their database layout to match.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Changes the gas schedule to reflect the costs of creating a witness by requiring clients update their database layout to match.
```

> description: This EIP introduces changes in the gas schedule to reflect the costs of creating a witness. It requires clients to update their database layout to match this, so as to avoid potential DoS attacks.

Reviewer 2: Description must be 140 characters or less.  Consider something like:
```suggestion
description:  Changes the gas schedule to reflect the costs of creating a witness by requiring clients update their database layout to match.
```

    else:
        pos = MAIN_STORAGE_OFFSET + storage_key
    return (
        pos // 256,
        pos % 256
    )
```

#### Write events for code

When a contract is created, make write events:

```python
(
    address,
    (CODE_OFFSET + i) // VERKLE_NODE_WIDTH,
    (CODE_OFFSET + i) % VERKLE_NODE_WIDTH
)
```

For `i` in `0 ... (len(code)+30)//31`.

### Transactions

#### Access events
For a transaction, make these access events:

```
(tx.origin, 0, VERSION_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.origin, 0, BALANCE_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.origin, 0, NONCE_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.origin, 0, CODE_SIZE_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.origin, 0, CODE_KECCAK_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.target, 0, VERSION_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.target, 0, BALANCE_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.target, 0, NONCE_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.target, 0, CODE_SIZE_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.target, 0, CODE_KECCAK_LEAF_KEY)
```

#### Write events

```
(tx.origin, 0, NONCE_LEAF_KEY)
```

if `value` is non-zero:

```
(tx.origin, 0, BALANCE_LEAF_KEY)
(tx.target, 0, BALANCE_LEAF_KEY)
```

### Witness gas costs

Remove the following gas costs:

 * Increased gas cost of `CALL` if it is nonzero-value-sending
 * EIP-2200 `SSTORE` gas costs except for the `SLOAD_GAS`
 * 200 per byte contract code cost

> Reduce gas gost:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reduce gas cost:
```

## Backward Compatibility

This EIP requires a hard fork, since it modifies consensus rules.

The main backwards-compatibility-breaking changes is the gas costs for code chunk access making some applications less economically viable. It can be mitigated by increasing the gas limit at the same time as implementing this EIP, reducing the risk that applications will no longer work at all due to transaction gas usage rising above the block gas limit. 

## Security Considerations

This EIP will mean that certain operations, mostly reading and writing several elements in the same suffix tree, become cheaper. If clients retain the same database structure as they have now, this would result in a DOS vector.

So some adaptation of the database is required in order to make this work.
 * In all possible futures, it is important to logically separate the commitment scheme from data storage. In particular, no traversal of the commitment scheme tree should be necessary to find any given state element

>  * In order to make accesses to the same stem cheap as required for this EIP, the best way is probably to store each stem in the same location in the database. Basically the 256 leaves of 32 bytes each would be stored in an 8kB BLOB. The overhead of reading/writing this BLOB is small because most of the cost of disk access is seeking and not the amount transfered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * In order to make accesses to the same stem cheap as required for this EIP, the best way is probably to store each stem in the same location in the database. Basically the 256 leaves of 32 bytes each would be stored in an 8kB BLOB. The overhead of reading/writing this BLOB is small because most of the cost of disk access is seeking and not the amount transferred.
```
